Cycles ledger documentation (#1862)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/setup/cycles/cycles-ledger.md

# Cycles ledger

## Overview

When developing and deploying canisters on the Internet Computer, developers need to have **cycles** to pay for the resources used by their canisters. The **cycles ledger** canister has been developed as an alternative to the **cycles wallet** canister for cycles management. 

The biggest difference between the cycles ledger and cycles wallet is that the cycles ledger is a single global ledger canister, where as the cycles wallet canister must be deployed locally to be used. Additionally, the cycles wallet has some downsides that the cycles ledger remedies. Some of these are:

- Cycles wallets consume cycles themselves, meaning developers need to pay cycles to store cycles.

> - Cycles wallets are a complex solution to associate cycles with principal IDs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cycles wallets are a complex solution to associate cycles with principal IDs.
```

Reviewer: I think, this is the main point, so I'd make this the first bullet point.

- Since the cycles wallet canister must be deployed locally, if a cycles wallet canister ID is lost, the cycles in that cycles wallet canister are also lost. 

> The cycles ledger solves these complications by providing functionality such as allowing principal IDs to hold cycles, simplifying cycle management, and reducing the risk of loosing cycles. 

Reviewer: I would say that the cycles ledger simplifies cycle management by providing the abstraction that principal IDs can hold cycles.

The cycles ledger complies with the ICRC-2 standard. In addition to standard ledger functionality, the cycles ledger canister also interacts with the NNS canisters and user canisters to provide cycles ledger-specific functions, such as:

> - Depositing cycles to a given principal ID.

Reviewer: Nit: Depositing cycles is not an action triggered by the cycles ledger. The cycles ledger accepts cycle deposits coming from other canisters.

- Sending cycles to a given canister ID.
- Creating new canisters using cycles.

:::caution
It is important to note that the cycles ledger does not provide the ability to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, while the cycles wallet can. This is because open call contexts may cause complications with the cycles ledger. 

> If you need to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, a cycles wallet should be loaded with cycles from the cycles ledger, then the cycles wallet should be used. 

Reviewer: Of course, cycles don't need to be transferred to the wallet from the cycles ledger. Any other source of cycles (i.e., any other canister) is fine, too. So, the cycles ledger should be stated as an example.

:::

## Obtaining ICP

To use the cycles ledger, first you need ICP tokens. There are a few different ways to obtain ICP tokens, such as:

> - Purchasing ICP tokens directly through an exchange that lists ICP tokens available for trade. To see all available places to purchase ICP tokens, check out this [page](https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/internet-computer/markets/). 

Reviewer: Trading for ICP on a decentralized exchange is another option.

- Receiving tokens as rewards for participating in the governance of the Internet Computer.
- Receiving a grant of tokens through the Internet Computer Association (ICA) or the DFINITY Foundation.
- Receiving tokens as remuneration for providing computing capacity as a node provider.

To obtain ICP, you also need to have an account to transfer those tokens into. To get your account ID, first determine which dfx identity you are using with the command:

```
dfx identity whoami
```

If you're using the default identity, you should create a new identity with the command:

```
dfx identity new identityName
```

> Your identity's seed phrase will be returned. Be sure to save this in a secure location. Then, set this identity to be used by default:

Reviewer: Does `dfx identity use` really set a new default or does it simply switch to this identity (for the current session)?

```

> dfx identity use identityName

Reviewer: How about `IDENTITY_NAME` to be consistent with the commands below?

### Creating a canister using cycles

New canisters can be created using the cycles ledger by using the `dfx canister create` and `dfx deploy` commands.

Both of these commands have the following options and syntax to create a new canister:

```
dfx canister create CANISTER_NAME
dfx deploy CANISTER_NAME
```

Replace `CANISTER_NAME` with a name for the new canister.

With these two commands, there are two **optional** flags that can be used:

- `dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --next-to CANISTER_ID:` The new canister will be installed on the same subnet as the canister provided.
- `dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --subnet SUBNET_ID`: The new canister will be installed on the given subnet.

If neither flag is used, the canister will be created on a random subnet using the user principal’s cycles.

### Using ICP instead of cycles for canister creation

Alternatively, if you want to use ICP instead of cycles for creating a canister, you can use the flag `--using-icp`, which will charge your principal ICP instead of cycles such as:

```

> dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME  --using-icp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --using-icp
```

- Cycles wallets are a complex solution to associate cycles with principal IDs.
- Cycles wallets consume cycles themselves, meaning developers need to pay cycles to store cycles.
- Since the cycles wallet canister must be deployed locally, if a cycles wallet canister ID is lost, the cycles in that cycles wallet canister are also lost. 

The cycles ledger simplifies cycle management by providing the ability for principal IDs to hold cycles. 

The cycles ledger complies with the ICRC-2 standard. In addition to standard ledger functionality, the cycles ledger canister also interacts with the NNS canisters and user canisters to provide cycles ledger-specific functions, such as:

- Accepting incoming cycles sent from other canisters.
- Sending cycles to other canisters.
- Creating new canisters using cycles.

:::caution
It is important to note that the cycles ledger does not provide the ability to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, while the cycles wallet can. This is because open call contexts may cause complications with the cycles ledger. 

> If you need to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, a cycles wallet should be loaded with cycles, such as from the cycles ledger or another canister, then the cycles wallet should be used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, a cycles wallet can be used as before. The cycles ledger can be used to load the cycles wallet with cycles.
```

# Cycles ledger

## Overview

When developing and deploying canisters on the Internet Computer, developers need to have **cycles** to pay for the resources used by their canisters. The **cycles ledger** canister has been developed as an alternative to the **cycles wallet** canister for cycles management. 

> The biggest difference between the cycles ledger and cycles wallet is that the cycles ledger is a single global ledger canister, whereas the cycles wallet canister must be deployed locally to be used. Additionally, the cycles wallet has some downsides that the cycles ledger remedies. Some of these are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The biggest difference between the cycles ledger and cycles wallet is that the cycles ledger is a single global ledger canister, whereas the cycles wallet canister must be deployed separately for every developer to be used. Additionally, the cycles wallet has some downsides that the cycles ledger remedies. Some of these are:
```

- Cycles wallets are a complex solution to associate cycles with principal IDs.
- Cycles wallets consume cycles themselves, meaning developers need to pay cycles to store cycles.

> - Since the cycles wallet canister must be deployed locally, if a cycles wallet canister ID is lost, the cycles in that cycles wallet canister are also lost. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Since the cycles wallet canister must be deployed separately, if a cycles wallet canister ID is lost, the cycles in that cycles wallet canister are also lost. 
```

Do we have the same definition of 'locally'? To me it means that it would be deployed on non-mainnet i.e. for local development

> The cycles ledger simplifies cycle management by providing the ability for principal IDs to hold cycles. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short, the cycles ledger simplifies cycle management by providing the ability for principal IDs to hold cycles. 
```

> The cycles ledger complies with the ICRC-2 standard. In addition to standard ledger functionality, the cycles ledger canister also interacts with the NNS canisters and user canisters to provide cycles ledger-specific functions, such as:

Reviewer: We should mention that it complies with ICRC-3 as well.

Author: Revised to "The cycles ledger currently complies with the ICRC-1, ICRC-2, and ICRC-3 standards."

> The cycles ledger complies with the ICRC-2 standard. In addition to standard ledger functionality, the cycles ledger canister also interacts with the NNS canisters and user canisters to provide cycles ledger-specific functions, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cycles ledger complies with the ICRC-2 standard. In addition to standard ledger functionality, the cycles ledger also interacts with the NNS canisters and user canisters to provide cycles ledger-specific functions, such as:
```

- Accepting incoming cycles sent from other canisters.
- Sending cycles to other canisters.
- Creating new canisters using cycles.

:::caution
It is important to note that the cycles ledger does not provide the ability to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, while the cycles wallet can. This is because open call contexts may cause complications with the cycles ledger. 

If you need to make arbitrary calls to other canisters with cycles, a cycles wallet can be used as before. The cycles ledger can be used to load the cycles wallet with cycles.
:::

> ## Obtaining ICP

Reviewer 2: Feels very out-of-place to me. IIUC it's supposed to be the first step of a cycles ledger walkthrough, but I don't see it advertised as such

Author: Revised order of headings to make this feel more like the first step.

To use the cycles ledger, first you need ICP tokens. There are a few different ways to obtain ICP tokens, such as:

- Purchasing ICP tokens directly through an exchange that lists ICP tokens available for trade. To see all available places to purchase ICP tokens, check out this [page](https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/internet-computer/markets/).
- Trading other tokens for ICP on a decentralized exchange.
- Receiving tokens as rewards for participating in the governance of the Internet Computer.
- Receiving a grant of tokens through the Internet Computer Association (ICA) or the DFINITY Foundation.
- Receiving tokens as remuneration for providing computing capacity as a node provider.

> To obtain ICP, you also need to have an account to transfer those tokens into. To get your account ID, first determine which dfx identity you are using with the command:

Reviewer: This sentence is not very clear. If I buy tokens on an exchange, I already have ICP, so I don't need to use `dfx` or somehow set up an account somewhere.

Maybe it should be a different section? Now that you have ICP, the next step is to transfer ICP to an account controlled via `dfx`, right?

Author: Revised to "Once you have obtained ICP, you also need to have an account controlled via `dfx` to transfer those tokens into. This step is necessary to create cycles and canisters. To get an account ID for an account controlled via `dfx`, first determine which `dfx` identity you are using with the command:"

```
dfx identity whoami
```

If you're using the default identity, you should create a new identity with the command:

```
dfx identity new IDENTITY_NAME
```

Replace `IDENTITY_NAME` with the an identity name of your choice, such as 'MyIdentity`.

Your identity's seed phrase will be returned. Be sure to save this in a secure location. Then, set this identity to be used by the current session:

```
dfx identity use IDENTITY_NAME
```

Then, to get the account ID for this identity, use the command:

```
dfx ledger account-id
```

This will display your account number on the ICP ledger. It looks similar to this:

```
e213184a548871a47fb526f3cba24e2ee2fbbc8129c4ab497ef2ce535130a0a4
```

> Then, to return the principal ID associated with your identity, run the command:

Reviewer: Shouldn't we also mention that an ICP transfer has to be made to this account in order to create cycles or canisters?

```
dfx identity get-principal
```

This principal ID will be used when others want to send you cycles using the cycles ledger. 

## Using the cycles ledger

### Checking your cycles balance

To check the cycles balance of your user principal ID, use the command:

```

> dfx cycles balance

Author: Revised to include `--network ic` flag

> This principal ID will be where you need to send your ICP tokens to create cycles and canisters. It will also be used when others want to send you cycles using the cycles ledger. 

Reviewer 2: The ICP tokens should be sent to the account id above, not the principal (although maybe some interfaces by now allow it)

Reviewer: I agree. How about moving the first sentence up, changing "principal ID" to "account number"?
The second sentence can then be changed to "Your cycles on the cycles ledger will be stored under this principal ID" or something along these lines.

```

### Converting ICP to cycles

To convert ICP into cycles using the cycles ledger, use the command:

```

> dfx cycles convert --icp-amount AMOUNT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dfx cycles convert AMOUNT
```

```

Replace `AMOUNT` with the number of ICP to convert into cycles, such as `2.7`.

### Transferring cycles to a principal

To transfer cycles to another principal ID, use the command:

```

> dfx cycles transfer AMOUNT --to-account PRINCIPAL_ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dfx cycles transfer AMOUNT PRINCIPAL_ID (--subaccount [SUBACCOUNT])
```

```

> Replace `AMOUNT` with the number of cycles, such as `34000000`, and `PRINCIPAL_ID` with the principal ID you'd like to transfer the cycles to, such as `tsqwz-udeik-5migd-ehrev-pvoqv-szx2g-akh5s-fkyqc-zy6q7-snav6-uqe`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `AMOUNT` with the number of cycles, such as `34000000`, and `PRINCIPAL_ID` with the principal ID you'd like to transfer the cycles to, such as `tsqwz-udeik-5migd-ehrev-pvoqv-szx2g-akh5s-fkyqc-zy6q7-snav6-uqe`. Optionally, a subaccount can be provided, in which case the recipient will receive the funds in the provided subaccount.
```

### Topping up a canister

To transfer cycles into a canister to top it up, use the command:

```

> dfx cycles transfer `AMOUNT` --top-up `CANISTER_ID`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dfx cycles top-up `AMOUNT`
```

> Replace `AMOUNT` with the number of cycles, such as `34000000`, and `PRINCIPAL_ID` with the principal ID you'd like to transfer the cycles to, such as `tsqwz-udeik-5migd-ehrev-pvoqv-szx2g-akh5s-fkyqc-zy6q7-snav6-uqe`. Optionally, a subaccount can be provided, in which case the recipient will receive the funds in the provided subaccount.

Reviewer 2: Maybe useful: it's finally possible to use suffixes like `500k` or `3TC`. See all options [here](https://github.com/dfinity/sdk/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#feat-accept-more-ways-to-specify-cycle-and-e8s-amounts)

Reviewer: Yes, I think it makes sense to add this information here (in particular when dealing with numbers in the trillions)!

```

Replace `AMOUNT` with the number of cycles, such as `34000000`, and `CANISTER_ID` with the canister ID you'd like to transfer the cycles to, such as `gastn-uqaaa-aaaae-aaafq-cai`.

### Creating a canister using cycles

New canisters can be created using the cycles ledger by using the `dfx canister create` and `dfx deploy` commands.

Both of these commands have the following options and syntax to create a new canister:

```
dfx canister create CANISTER_NAME
dfx deploy CANISTER_NAME
```

Replace `CANISTER_NAME` with a name for the new canister.

With these two commands, there are two **optional** flags that can be used:

- `dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --next-to CANISTER_ID:` The new canister will be installed on the same subnet as the canister provided.
- `dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --subnet SUBNET_ID`: The new canister will be installed on the given subnet.

> If neither flag is used, the canister will be created on a random subnet using the user principal’s cycles.

Reviewer: @sesi200, we may have to update this part, depending on the outcome of the architecture meeting.

Reviewer 2: How it works now:

- if `--subnet`, `--subnet-type`, or `--next-to` is specified, those are used
- if nothing is specified and no canisters exist yet in that project, a random subnet is used
- if nothing is specified and the project contains canisters on only one subnet, then that subnet is used
- if nothing is specified and the project contains canisters on multiple subnets, then dfx asks the user to specify a subnet

> ### Using ICP instead of cycles for canister creation
> 
> Alternatively, if you want to use ICP instead of cycles for creating a canister, you can use the flag `--using-icp`, which will charge your principal ICP instead of cycles such as:
> 
> ```
> dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --using-icp --network ic
> ```
> 
> Or you can set a specific amount of ICP with the option `--using-icp-amount AMOUNT`, such as:
> 
> ```
> dfx create canister CANISTER_NAME --using-icp-amount 2.7 --network ic
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I have not implemented `--using-icp`

Reviewer: Correct me if I'm wrong but isn't this "only" some rewiring and adding the flag? `dfx` currently uses ICP anyway to create canisters, right?
I'm basically asking what we should do with this part: Remove it for now until we have this functionality or only merge the documentation once the functionality is available?

Author: I think it is best to remove it for now, then update the documentation in the future once this functionality is implemented.

## Fees

> Certain functions of the cycle ledger incur a fee. The full breakdown of fees can be found below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most functions of the cycle ledger incur a fee. The full breakdown of fees can be found below:
```
